---
title: "Ken Doyle (BNA) re Foreign Nationals IP - 2015-03-19"
---

[More info re. AO 2014-20]({{< rel "fec/volunteer_ip" >}})

Reproduced with permission from Money & Politics Report, (Mar. 23,
2015).
Copyright 2015 by The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc. (800-372-1033)
<http://www.bna.com>

![Bloomberg BNA](bloomberg_bna_250_100.png)
<!--  width: 125, height: 50 -->

### Money & Politics Report™

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Source: Money & Politics Report: News
Archive > 2015 > March > 03/20/2015 > Lead Report > Campaign
Finance: FEC Ruling Allows Foreign Volunteers To Provide PAC With
Intellectual Property

Campaign Finance

### FEC Ruling Allows Foreign Volunteers To Provide PAC With Intellectual Property

![Federal Election Commission Logo](fec_480.png)
<!-- 120x120 -->

*By Kenneth P. Doyle*

March 19 --- The Federal Election Commission voted 4-2 to approve a
controversial, long-pending advisory opinion allowing a political action
committee to receive intellectual property produced by foreign
volunteers.

The vote at an FEC open meeting March 19 fell mainly along party lines,
with one Democratic commissioner, FEC Chairwoman Ann Ravel, joining the
three FEC Republicans to approve the ruling. Two commissioners holding
Democratic seats, Steven Walther and Ellen Weintraub, dissented.

Approved was an advisory opinion (AO 2014-20) allowing a political
action committee called Make Your Laws, or MYL PAC, to receive computer
services from foreigners using open-source code, which could then become
the intellectual property of the PAC.

In addition, the FEC voted unanimously at the meeting to approve two
notices asking for public comments on rulemaking petitions. One
petition, submitted by the nonprofit Public Citizen, asks the FEC to
strengthen campaign finance rules for government contractors. The other,
submitted by a bipartisan group of election lawyers, asks for updates to
the FEC's administrative fines program, as well as for changes to the
agency's reporting forms to accommodate registration and reporting by
super PACs.

The commissioners approved both notices after resolving questions about
whether public comments submitted by e-mail would be accepted by the
agency (3968 Money & Politics Report, 3/18/15). The final versions of
the notices said e-mail comments would be accepted.

#### Elton John vs. Computer Coders

The vote on the MYL PAC opinion followed a debate among the
commissioners about whether the new ruling would be a major change in
campaign finance law.

Weintraub suggested the move broke agency precedents and could allow
circumvention of the law generally banning foreign contributions to U.S.
campaigns. She noted that the draft opinion ultimately approved by the
FEC majority explicitly would overturn a 1981 ruling (AO 1981-51)
involving the campaign of former Sen. Howard Metzenbaum (D-Ohio), which
barred the campaign from receiving a valuable painting from a foreign
artist.

Other commissioners, including Ravel and Republican Lee Goodman, played
down the significance of the ruling.

Ravel noted that the FEC had earlier dismissed an enforcement case
involving a concert by the British singer Elton John benefitting the
2008 presidential campaign of Hillary Clinton. Ravel said that allowing
a famous foreigner to provide such a significant benefit to a campaign
but forbidding volunteer computer coders from helping a PAC "makes no
sense."

Weintraub, who recused herself from voting on the Elton John concert
matter in 2009, indicated she did not necessarily agree with the
dismissal of that case and suggested the latest FEC ruling could open an
even bigger loophole. She said the new advisory opinion could allow the
British singer to sign over the rights to one of his popular and
lucrative songs, like "Candle in the Wind," allowing foreign money to
flow into a U.S. campaign.

The president of MYL PAC, who goes by the one-word name Sai, said in a
written comment after the FEC meeting that he was pleased that the
advisory opinion was approved but had "no position on what kinds of
foreign national services should or shouldn't be permitted" beyond the
computer coding directly involved in the request.

"Our request was purely pragmatic, to ensure we obey the law while
running an open source project," he said. "We don't have any direct
position on e.g. concert performances or recordings thereof, and we're
not likely to benefit from one any time soon."

#### Contractor Rulemaking Notice

Like the MYL PAC advisory ruling, the rulemaking notices approved by the
FEC commissioners were potentially significant, though it was far from
clear if the FEC would take final action on the toughest issues
involved.

The FEC agreed only to take comments regarding possible new regulations
restricting campaign contributions by government contractors, and there
was little discussion at the March 19 commission meeting of the merits
of a possible clampdown on contractor campaign money.

Only one commissioner, Weintraub, directly addressed the issue, saying
she was "open-mined" about the issues raised in the rulemaking petition
and wanted to hear from the public about it.

Public Citizen, the watchdog group filing the petition, wants the FEC to
tighten current rules. It said the rules allow government contractors to
easily avoid restrictions on campaign money simply by funneling the
money through a separate legal entity that doesn't hold contracts.

Last year, the FEC voted 5-1 to dismiss a Public Citizen complaint
against Chevron, finding that the ban on campaign money from government
contractors didn't apply to the energy company when it made the $2.5
million contribution to a Republican super PAC, the Congressional
Leadership Fund, in 2012. The FEC found that Chevron Corp., the parent
company listed as making the super PAC contribution, was a "separate and
distinct legal entity" from Chevron USA, the subsidiary that had federal
contracts.

#### Lawyers' Petition

Also approved for public comment was the separate petition for
rulemaking filed by a bipartisan group of influential election lawyers,
led by Democrat Robert Bauer and Republican Benjamin Ginsberg. The
lawyers said the FEC should write regulations to implement six new
categories of reporting violations to be handled by the commission's
administrative fines program (AFP), pursuant to the law adopted by
Congress in 2013 and never implemented by the agency.

The lawyers also asked the FEC to make current campaign finance
reporting forms for political committees clearer and more in line with
real-world campaign activities. The petition noted that super
PACs---known to the FEC as "independent expenditure only committees," or
IE PACs---have been explicitly approved by the FEC since 2010, following
major court rulings. However, current FEC forms don't specifically
allow registration and reporting by super PACs, the lawyers' said. They
suggested that the FEC rewrite the forms to allow super PACs to declare
their independent status and report contributions by corporations and
unions.

Weintraub also weighed in on this petition, suggesting the FEC might be
able to agree on adjusting the administrative fines program for
reporting violations, but rewriting forms to accommodate super PACs
might raise more problematic issues. If it goes forward, she said, this
would be the first formal FEC rulemaking of any kind dealing with super
PACs, and it might require the FEC to address some of the controversies
raised by these relatively new but increasingly influential entities.

Responding to Weintraub, Republican Commissioner Caroline Hunter said
the lawyers filing this petition didn't ask the FEC to tackle the tough
questions related to super PACs but wanted the commissioners only to
agree on the "easy" matter of how to change outdated forms.

Weintraub said that dealing with the tougher questions "may not be easy
but it is important."

To contact the reporter on this story: Kenneth P. Doyle in Washington at
<kdoyle@bna.com>

To contact the editor responsible for this story: Heather Rothman at
<hrothman@bna.com>

#### For More Information

Documents considered at the March 19 meeting and video of the meeting
are available at <http://www.fec.gov/agenda/2015/agenda20150319.shtml>.

Contact us at <http://www.bna.com/contact/index.html> or call 1-800-372-1033

ISSN 1523-570X
Copyright © 2015, The Bureau of National Affairs, Inc.. Reproduction or
redistribution, in whole or in part, and in any form, without express
written permission, is prohibited except as permitted by the BNA
Copyright Policy.

